Add information for node operators (#94)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/node-operators/snapshots.md

---
sidebar_position: 6
title: Using snapshots
hide_title: false
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

This section will take you through using the state snapshots, these allow a node to be start without having to replay the whole chain in order to catchup with the current block height of the network.

A node can be started by using a local snapshot (state of the chain built by the current node) this can be useful when the node have been running with the network, have built their own state locally, but had to shutdown for maintenance or upgrade for example.

The snapshots can also be retrieved from the network without previous local state, this would be useful when a node is joining the network after the bootstrap of the network.

> All not of the network will be taking snapshot of the state at the same block height, this is configured globally using the following network parameter:

Reviewer: yes every node.

## List available snapshots
The vega toolchain offer a subcommand to list all snapshots available locally. Once your node have been running for a while, you should be able to see them using the following command:
```
vega snapshots --home=/path/to/vega/home
Snapshots available: 2
	Height 901, version: 4, size 92, hash: 562414bb5be3ccc8403fbd030d06eebc799bfef5ca25b02ad360fec349cb4bc8
	Height 601, version: 3, size 92, hash: 72a2edd960cf3340ae94bf092991f923850738144789959124590675798fefd9
```
Here we can see that our node took 2 snapshots, at the block 901 and 601.

You can set how many blocks you want the note to retain through the vega configuration:
```Toml
[Snapshot]
  ...
  KeepRecent = 10
  ...
```
With this setting a node will always keep the last 10 snapshots in its database.

## Using a local snapshot
Using the `vega snapshots` command line we can get a list of all snapshots available locally.

You can then start your node using a snapshot either directly from the command line or the configuration file by specifying the block height.

From the command line:
```
vega node --home=/path/to/vega/home --snapshot.load-from-block-height=901
```

> From the configuration file in the Snapshot section:

Reviewer 2: do we specify the location/path to the Snapshot section?

Reviewer: ah it's optional.

```
[Snapshot]
  ...
  StartHeight = 901
  ...
```

## Snapshots from the network

:::note

> When loading snapshots from the network, the steps down previously to load locally are not necessary. You will need to get the snapshots information from another

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When loading snapshots from the network, the steps done previously to load locally are not necessary. You will need to get the snapshots information from another
```

node runner in the network (e.g: which block height a snapshot was taken).
:::

> Tendermint offer the possibility to gossip snapshots taken by other nodes. This can be enabled via the tendermint configuration. You will also need the hash of the block at the height you want to load the snapshot, but also a list of trusted tendermint RPC server (the default port on the node should be 26657).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tendermint offers the possibility to gossip snapshots taken by other nodes. This can be enabled via the tendermint configuration. You will also need the hash of the block at the height you want to load the snapshot, but also a list of trusted Tendermint RPC servers (the default port on the node should be 26657).
```

> Update the following tendermint configuration section:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Update the following Tendermint configuration section:
```

```Toml
[statesync]
enable = true # this default to false, set it to true
rpc_servers = "n01.testnet.vega.xyz:26657,n02.testnet.vega.xyz:26657" # a comma separated list of tendermint rpc
trust_height = 901 # the height of the block we want to join at
trust_hash = "5E1501B89463A9F23C454A58DB92913D960E47DCA76D1FC1EA03988A6C6D0C30" # the hash of the block
```

:::note

> The previous example uses addresses from the vega testnet (fairground) make sure to use address of node on the network you are willing to join.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous example uses addresses from the Vega testnet (fairground) make sure to use an address of a node on the network you are willing to join.
```

:::

> Other settings are available to configure snapshots, but those are the only one required to start the node from a given block. You can get more details on snapshot from the [tendermint documentation](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/spec/abci/apps.html#state-sync).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other settings are available to configure snapshots, however, those described in this documentation are the only ones required to start the node from a given block. You can get more details on snapshots from the [Tendermint documentation](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/spec/abci/apps.html#state-sync).
```

## Inspect snapshots data using vegatools

:::note

> This is not required to deploy / uses the snapshots. This section shows how to use vegatools to inspect the data stored in the snapshot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is not required to deploy / use the snapshots. This section shows how to use vegatools to inspect the data stored in the snapshot.
```

:::

Vegatools offer basic utilities to read the data from a snapshots and dump it into json format.

> If you have go and git configured on your environment you can install vegatools like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have go and git configured on your environment you can install vegatools using the following command:
```
